JUDY WOODRUFF: Fifty percent
of health care spending in
the U.S. can be traced to just
5 percent of the population.
Those are the sickest and often
poorest Americans who spend much
of their time cycling in and
out of costly emergency care.
While congressional leaders
square off toward a vote next
week on the future of the health
care law, there are pilot
projects on the ground that
are focused on how to improve
treating this group of patients
and also to save money.
That's even the case
in remote areas.
Special correspondent
Jackie Judd has our report
from Kalispell, Montana.
JACKIE JUDD: Not so long ago,
Sheran Greene and her beloved
dog were living in a car in
downtown Kalispell, Montana,
and routinely heading to the
local emergency room because
of chronic lung disease and the
need for an electrical outlet.
SHERAN GREENE, Patient: I
was there like clockwork
every day, sometimes
being treated, sometimes
having to charge up my oxygen
machine, which I used, because
I had no electricity, sometimes
just getting out of the cold.
JACKIE JUDD: It is this cycle
of patients going in and out
of the hospital, at great
cost, with not much benefit,
that the group around this
table is trying to break.
WOMAN: How can we avoid some
of these emergency room visits
that really are not necessary?
JACKIE JUDD: A pilot program
funded by the federal government
and a foundation began
late last year in Kalispell,
Billings and Helena.
WOMAN: How are you?
WOMAN: Tired.
JACKIE JUDD: Health care players
already in the community now
team up in a very deliberate
way to identify high-needs
patients and to go well
beyond the traditional
bounds of medical
care.
LARA SHADWICK, Mountain-Pacific
Quality Health: Do you think
you can find housing that'll
take your Section 8 voucher?
WOMAN: Oh, yes.
JACKIE JUDD: Lara Shadwick
directs the Montana program.
LARA SHADWICK: Some of the
themes really rest on social
determinants of health, lack of
transportation, housing
insecurity, food insecurity,
economics, finances.
Those are really some
of the drivers that
are the commonalities
for these patients.
JACKIE JUDD: The Kalispell
care team runs lean.
There are community
health workers, like Jane
Emmert, who are trained
to manage non-medical
issues works, and the head
of the team, registered
nurse Lesly Starling.
Together, they aim to reset the
paths these patients are on.
LESLY STARLING, Kalispell
Regional Healthcare:
They're so sick.
They have gotten so used
to the way that they live.
I do feel like that patients get
very used to their environment,
and they get very used
to their choices.
They get very used
to their lifestyle.
And it's not -- it's almost
like they build up an immunity
to what their life looks like.
JACKIE JUDD: David Dixon was
once a member of an emergency
medical team and a fishing
and hunting guide.
Since a disabling motorcycle
accident, he struggles with
chronic pain and nausea, overuse
of medications and episodes
of depression and anxiety.
In a 14-month period, Dixon
went to the E.R. 42 times.
DAVID DIXON, Patient: I just
want to have a better life.
I want to be able to wake
up in the morning and
have a halfway decent day.
I would like to be able to make
plans for tomorrow morning.
JACKIE JUDD: In just a few
weeks, the team has helped
Dixon to reconnect with a pain
specialist and link him up to
a pharmacist to sort out the
many medications he is on.
WOMAN: Are you taking that
one also pretty regularly?
DAVID DIXON: There's so many
medicines I'm taking, that I
don't know which ones are really
helping and which ones
aren't at this point.
WOMAN: OK.
JACKIE JUDD: Dixon, like so
many high-needs patients,
has mental health issues.
Specialists in Kalispell are
in short supply, so Starling
typically gets advice from an
expert some distance away about
how best to work with patients.
MAN: It sounds like you have
been using a lot of those, some
of the motivational interviewing
skills that we have been
talking about, finding
what kind of barriers
there are for him, finding
what his goals are.
JACKIE JUDD: Sometimes, a
patient's need is as basic
as a roof over one's head.
The team found Sheran Greene
an affordable apartment, which
is no easy task in Kalispell.
Starling acts as a liaison to
Greene's primary care doctor.
And other community workers
literally deliver Greene to
Dr. Jonathan Anderson's door.
DR.
JONATHAN ANDERSON,
Greene's Physician: Good.
SHERAN GREENE: So,
do I have a heart?
DR.
JONATHAN ANDERSON:
It's still beating.
She's allowing people into
her life, is what she's doing.
Before, it was basically the
E.R. and the hospital, and then
she'd come in for follow-up
visits here, and then she'd
bounce around and come back.
Now she's allowing people from
the community to come in, and
allow them to help, either
help her move things, allow
them to kind of check in on
her and make sure she's doing
all right.
JACKIE JUDD: When Greene was
homeless, in one six-month
period, her Medicare charges
were $100,000.
Since November, hospital
charges are less than $6,000.
By the time this pilot
program ends, the hope is over
$2 million will be saved.
Programs like these first
came to urban areas.
Rolling one out in a vast rural
state like Montana is a very
different kind of experiment,
with very unique challenges,
starting with simple geography.
JANE EMMERT, Director, ASSIST:
Sometimes, we're going on
mountainous roads that are
icy and treacherous.
Sometimes, they're narrow
dirt roads that you aren't
sure that you want to go down.
JACKIE JUDD: To get to a patient
can be a 60-mile round trip.
So Emmert frequently heads
out on her own to their homes,
as she did on this day, to
visit 25-year-old Mackenzie
Kramer, who is slowly
recovering from major surgery.
JANE EMMERT: So, if you try to
do any of this, and it's tough
for you, just know what we'd
be glad to help you fill it out.
JACKIE JUDD: Emmert is there to
help him manage the paperwork
for disability, and to put him
in touch with Starling, who
can check up on many more
patients if she stays behind in
her Kalispell office.
LESLY STARLING: How
has the pain been?
MAN: It's been manageable.
It's getting better, I think.
JACKIE JUDD: The team also
gently pushes Kramer to think
about his future once his health
stabilizes.
JANE EMMERT: He's got to have
something to look forward to.
So that's why we're looking into
possibilities with college, or
a job, that he could reclaim
the life of a 25-year-old again.
Part of the goal is to help
you connect to things you
might not have already.
MAN: Somebody that knows
where to go, how to do it.
JACKIE JUDD: You have a
whole team of people, right?
MAN: Well, I have a
whole team of people.
JACKIE JUDD: Progress
with these patients can
come in fits and starts.
Less than 24 hours after a home
visit filled with encouragement
to manage his illnesses
differently, David Dixon
takes himself back to the E.R.
WOMAN: What happened?
DAVID DIXON: I woke up nauseous
and vomiting, and took my
medicines and couldn't keep my
medicines down, so I went for
a trip to the hospital again.
JACKIE JUDD: Dixon's team
wasn't surprised that he went
to the hospital, his visit a
reminder of how fragile these
patients are and how much work
it takes to break the cycle.
DAVID DIXON: It's taken
years to get me where I am.
They're starting
to understand it.
They're starting to get programs
together that fill in the gaps
in the medical profession,
where I had problems before.
They don't know everything.
It's not a magic wand, but
at least they're trying.
JACKIE JUDD: The pilot program
has another year to prove
these intensive interventions
can succeed, and, if so,
whether there is the funding
and the will to make them a new
standard of care for the most
challenging people to treat.
For the "NewsHour,"
this is Jackie Judd
in Kalispell, Montana.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Two quick
notes about Jackie's story.
It is not yet clear
whether the moves by the
president and Republicans
to replace the Affordable
Care Act will affect the funding
of programs like this one.
And, for the record, the Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation, which
helps to fund the Kalispell
pilot program, is also a
funder of the "NewsHour."